README.md, before:

# CCMetagen

CCMetagen processes sequence alignments produced with [KMA](https://bitbucket.org/genomicepidemiology/kma), which implements the ConClave sorting scheme to achieve highly accurate read mappings. The pipeline is fast enough to use the whole NCBI nt collection as reference, facilitating the inclusion of understudied organisms, such as microbial eukaryotes, in metagenome surveys. CCMetagen produces ranked taxonomic results in user-friendly formats that are ready for publication or downstream statistical analyses.

If you use CCMetagen, please cite: TBA
Besides the guidelines below, we also provide a tutorial to reproduce our metagenome clasisfication analyses of the microbiome of wild birds [here](https://github.com/vrmarcelino/CCMetagen/tree/master/tutorial).


## Requirements and Installation

Make sure you have the dependencies below installed and accessible in your $PATH.
The guidelines below are for Unix systems.

  * If you do not have it already, download and install [Python 3](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
CCMetagen requires Python modules [pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) and [ETE3](http://etetoolkit.org/). The easiest way to install these modules is via conda or pip:

`conda install pandas`

  * You need a C-compiler and zlib development files to install KMA:

`sudo apt-get install libz-dev`

  * Download and install [KMA](https://bitbucket.org/genomicepidemiology/kma):
```
git clone https://bitbucket.org/genomicepidemiology/kma.git
cd kma && make
```

  * [Krona](https://github.com/marbl/Krona) is required for graphs. To install Krona it in the local folder:
```
wget https://github.com/marbl/Krona/releases/download/v2.7/KronaTools-2.7.tar
tar xvf KronaTools-2.7.tar 
cd  KronaTools-2.7
./install.pl --prefix . 
```

  * Then download CCMetagen and add it to your path.
If you have git:
```
git clone https://github.com/vrmarcelino/CCMetagen
```
You can also download the python files from https://github.com/vrmarcelino/CCMetagen/tree/master/tools

Then add the CCMetagen python scripts to the path, temporarily or permanently. For example:
`PATH=$PATH<your_folder>/CCMetagen/tools`

To update CCMetagen, go to the CCMetagen folder and type: `git pull`


## Databases

**Option 1:** Download the indexed (ready-to-go) nt database [here - add link]().
This database contains the whole in NCBI nucleotide collection (of of Jan 2018), and therefore is suitable to identify a range of microorganisms, including prokaryotes and eukaryotes. 

**Option 2:** Build your own reference database.
Follow the instructions in the [KMA website](https://bitbucket.org/genomicepidemiology/kma) to index the database.
It is important that taxids are incorporated in sequence headers for processing with CCMetagen.
We provide scripts to rename sequences in the nt database [here](https://github.com/vrmarcelino/CCMetagen/tree/master/benchmarking/rename_nt).

If you want to use the RefSeq database, the format is similar to the one required for Kraken. The [Opiniomics blog](http://www.opiniomics.org/building-a-kraken-database-with-new-ftp-structure-and-no-gi-numbers/) describes how to download sequences in an adequate format.


## Quick Start

  * First map reads to the database with **KMA**.
For paired-end files:
```
kma -ipe $SAMPLE_R1 $SAMPLE_R2 -o sample_out_kma -t_db $db -t $th -1t1 -mem_mode -and -apm f
```

For single-end files:
```
kma -i $SAMPLE -o sample_out_kma -t_db $db -t $th -1t1 -mem_mode -and
```

Where:

$db is the path to the reference database
$th is the number of threads
$SAMPLE_R1 is the path to the mate1 of a paired-end metagenome/metatranscriptome sample (fastq or fasta)
$SAMPLE_R2 is the path to the mate2 of a paired-end metagenome/metatranscriptome sample (fastq or fasta)
$SAMPLE is the path to a single-end metagenome/metatranscriptome file (reads or contigs)


  * Then run **CCMetagen**:
```
CCMetagen.py -i $sample_out_kma.res -o results
```
Where $sample_out_kma.res is alignment results produced by KMA.

Note that if you are running CCMetagen from the local folder (instead of adding it to your path), you may need to add 'python' before CCMetagen: `python CCMetagen.py -i $sample_out_kma.res -o results`

Done! This will make an additional quality filter and output a text file with ranked taxonomic classifications and a krona graph file for interactive visualization.

For a list of options to customize your analyze, type:
```
CCMetagen.py -h
```

  * To summarize results for multiple samples, use **CCMetagen_merge**:
```
CCMetagen_merge.py -i $CCMetagen_out
```

Where $CCMetagen_out is the folder containing the CCMetagen taxonomic classifications.
The results must be in .csv format (default or '--mode text' output of CCMetagen), and no other csv file should be present in the folder.

The flag '-t' define the taxonomic level to merge the results. The default is species-level.

You can also filter out specific taxa, at any taxonomic level:

Use flag -kr to keep (k) or remove (r) taxa.
Use flag -l to set the taxonomic level for the filtering.
Use flag -tlist to list the taxa to keep or remove (separated by comma).

EX1: Filter out bacteria: `CCMetagen_merge.py -i $CCMetagen_out -kr r -l Kingdom -tlist Bacteria`

EX2: Filter out bacteria and Metazoa: `CCMetagen_merge.py -i $CCMetagen_out -kr r -l Kingdom -tlist Bacteria, Metazoa`

EX3: Merge results at family-level, and remove Metazoa and Viridiplantae taxa at Kingdom level:
```
CCMetagen_merge.py -i $CCMetagen_out -t Family -kr r -l Kingdom -tlist Metazoa,Viridiplantae -o family_table
```

For species-level filtering (where there is a space in taxa names), use quotation marks.
Ex 4: Keep only Escherichia coli and Candida albicans:
```
CCMetagen_merge.py -i 05_KMetagen/ -kr k -l Species -tlist "Escherichia coli,Candida albicans"
```

For options, type:
```
CCMetagen_merge.py -h
```

You can also refer to our [tutorial](https://github.com/vrmarcelino/CCMetagen/tree/master/tutorial) for an applied example of the CCMetagen pipeline.


## FAQs

  * Error taxid not found.
You probably need to update your local ETE3 database, which contains the taxids and their lineages information:
```
python
from ete3 import NCBITaxa
ncbi = NCBITaxa()
ncbi.update_taxonomy_database()
quit()
```

  * TypeError: concat() got an unexpected keyword argument 'sort'.
If you get this error, please update the python module pandas:
```
pip install pandas --upgrade --user
```

  * WARNING: no NCBI's taxid found for accession [something],
This match will not get taxonomic ranks

This is not an error, this is just a warning indicating that one of your query sequences matchs to a genbank record for which the NCBI taxonomic identifier (taxid) is not known. CCMetagen therefore will not be able to assign taxonomic ranks to this match, but you will still be able to see it in the output file.


## Complete option list

CCMetagen:
```
usage: CCMetagen.py [-h] [-m MODE] -i RES_FP [-o OUTPUT_FP]
                    [-r REFERENCE_DATABASE] [-c COVERAGE] [-q QUERY_IDENTITY]
                    [-d DEPTH] [-p PVALUE] [-st SPECIES_THRESHOLD]
                    [-gt GENUS_THRESHOLD] [-ft FAMILY_THRESHOLD]
                    [-ot ORDER_THRESHOLD] [-ct CLASS_THRESHOLD]
                    [-pt PHYLUM_THRESHOLD] [-off TURN_OFF_SIM_THRESHOLDS]

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -m MODE, --mode MODE  what do you want CCMetagen to do? Valid options are
                        'visual', 'text' or 'both': text: parses kma, filters
                        based on quality and output a text file with taxonomic
                        information and detailed mapping information visual:
                        parses kma, filters based on quality and output a
                        simplified text file and a krona html file for
                        visualization both: outputs both text and visual file
                        formats. Default = both
  -i RES_FP, --res_fp RES_FP
                        Path to the KMA result (.res file)
  -o OUTPUT_FP, --output_fp OUTPUT_FP
                        Path to the output file. Default = CCMetagen_out
  -r REFERENCE_DATABASE, --reference_database REFERENCE_DATABASE
                        Which reference database was used. Options: UNITE,
                        RefSeq or nt. Default = nt
  -c COVERAGE, --coverage COVERAGE
                        Minimum coverage. Default = 20
  -q QUERY_IDENTITY, --query_identity QUERY_IDENTITY
                        Minimum query identity (Phylum level). Default = 50
  -d DEPTH, --depth DEPTH
                        Minimum sequencing depth. Default = 0.2.
  -p PVALUE, --pvalue PVALUE
                        Minimum p-value. Default = 0.05.
  -st SPECIES_THRESHOLD, --species_threshold SPECIES_THRESHOLD
                        Species-level similarity threshold. Default = 98.41
  -gt GENUS_THRESHOLD, --genus_threshold GENUS_THRESHOLD
                        Genus-level similarity threshold. Default = 96.31
  -ft FAMILY_THRESHOLD, --family_threshold FAMILY_THRESHOLD
                        Family-level similarity threshold. Default = 88.51
  -ot ORDER_THRESHOLD, --order_threshold ORDER_THRESHOLD
                        Order-level similarity threshold. Default = 81.21
  -ct CLASS_THRESHOLD, --class_threshold CLASS_THRESHOLD
                        Class-level similarity threshold. Default = 80.91
  -pt PHYLUM_THRESHOLD, --phylum_threshold PHYLUM_THRESHOLD
                        Phylum-level similarity threshold. Default = 0 - not
                        applied
  -off TURN_OFF_SIM_THRESHOLDS, --turn_off_sim_thresholds TURN_OFF_SIM_THRESHOLDS
                        Turns simularity-based filtering off. Options = y
                        or n. Default = n
 ```

CCMetagen_merge:
 ```
usage: CCMetagen_merge.py [-h] -i INPUT_FP [-t TAX_LEVEL] [-o OUTPUT_FP]
                          [-kr KEEP_OR_REMOVE] [-l FILTERING_TAX_LEVEL]
                          [-tlist TAXA_LIST]

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -i INPUT_FP, --input_fp INPUT_FP
                        Path to the folder containing CCMetagen text results.
                        Note that files must end with ".res.csv" ad the folder
                        should not contain other .res.csv files
  -t TAX_LEVEL, --tax_level TAX_LEVEL
                        Taxonomic level to merge the results. Options:
                        Closest_match (includes different genes for the same
                        species), Species (Default), Genus, Order, Class,
                        Phylum, Kingdom and Superkingdom
  -o OUTPUT_FP, --output_fp OUTPUT_FP
                        Path to the output file. Default = merged_samples
  -kr KEEP_OR_REMOVE, --keep_or_remove KEEP_OR_REMOVE
                        keep or remove taxa. Options = k (keep), r (remove)
                        and n (none, default)
  -l FILTERING_TAX_LEVEL, --filtering_tax_level FILTERING_TAX_LEVEL
                        level to perform taxonomic filtering, default = none
  -tlist TAXA_LIST, --taxa_list TAXA_LIST
                        list taxon names (comma-separated) that you want to
                        keep or exclude
 ```

Commit message:

fixed issue with merging at closest match

README.md, after:

# CCMetagen

CCMetagen processes sequence alignments produced with [KMA](https://bitbucket.org/genomicepidemiology/kma), which implements the ConClave sorting scheme to achieve highly accurate read mappings. The pipeline is fast enough to use the whole NCBI nt collection as reference, facilitating the inclusion of understudied organisms, such as microbial eukaryotes, in metagenome surveys. CCMetagen produces ranked taxonomic results in user-friendly formats that are ready for publication or downstream statistical analyses.

If you use CCMetagen, please cite: TBA
Besides the guidelines below, we also provide a tutorial to reproduce our metagenome clasisfication analyses of the microbiome of wild birds [here](https://github.com/vrmarcelino/CCMetagen/tree/master/tutorial).


## Requirements and Installation

Make sure you have the dependencies below installed and accessible in your $PATH.
The guidelines below are for Unix systems.

  * If you do not have it already, download and install [Python 3](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
CCMetagen requires Python modules [pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) and [ETE3](http://etetoolkit.org/). The easiest way to install these modules is via conda or pip:

`conda install pandas`

  * You need a C-compiler and zlib development files to install KMA:

`sudo apt-get install libz-dev`

  * Download and install [KMA](https://bitbucket.org/genomicepidemiology/kma):
```
git clone https://bitbucket.org/genomicepidemiology/kma.git
cd kma && make
```

  * [Krona](https://github.com/marbl/Krona) is required for graphs. To install Krona it in the local folder:
```
wget https://github.com/marbl/Krona/releases/download/v2.7/KronaTools-2.7.tar
tar xvf KronaTools-2.7.tar 
cd  KronaTools-2.7
./install.pl --prefix . 
```

  * Then download CCMetagen and add it to your path.
If you have git:
```
git clone https://github.com/vrmarcelino/CCMetagen
```
You can also download the python files from https://github.com/vrmarcelino/CCMetagen/tree/master/tools

Then add the CCMetagen python scripts to the path, temporarily or permanently. For example:
`PATH=$PATH<your_folder>/CCMetagen/tools`

To update CCMetagen, go to the CCMetagen folder and type: `git pull`


## Databases

**Option 1:** Download the indexed (ready-to-go) nt database [here - add link]().
This database contains the whole in NCBI nucleotide collection (of of Jan 2018), and therefore is suitable to identify a range of microorganisms, including prokaryotes and eukaryotes. 

**Option 2:** Build your own reference database.
Follow the instructions in the [KMA website](https://bitbucket.org/genomicepidemiology/kma) to index the database.
It is important that taxids are incorporated in sequence headers for processing with CCMetagen.
We provide scripts to rename sequences in the nt database [here](https://github.com/vrmarcelino/CCMetagen/tree/master/benchmarking/rename_nt).

If you want to use the RefSeq database, the format is similar to the one required for Kraken. The [Opiniomics blog](http://www.opiniomics.org/building-a-kraken-database-with-new-ftp-structure-and-no-gi-numbers/) describes how to download sequences in an adequate format.


## Quick Start

  * First map reads to the database with **KMA**.
For paired-end files:
```
kma -ipe $SAMPLE_R1 $SAMPLE_R2 -o sample_out_kma -t_db $db -t $th -1t1 -mem_mode -and -apm f
```

For single-end files:
```
kma -i $SAMPLE -o sample_out_kma -t_db $db -t $th -1t1 -mem_mode -and
```

Where:

$db is the path to the reference database
$th is the number of threads
$SAMPLE_R1 is the path to the mate1 of a paired-end metagenome/metatranscriptome sample (fastq or fasta)
$SAMPLE_R2 is the path to the mate2 of a paired-end metagenome/metatranscriptome sample (fastq or fasta)
$SAMPLE is the path to a single-end metagenome/metatranscriptome file (reads or contigs)


  * Then run **CCMetagen**:
```
CCMetagen.py -i $sample_out_kma.res -o results
```
Where $sample_out_kma.res is alignment results produced by KMA.

Note that if you are running CCMetagen from the local folder (instead of adding it to your path), you may need to add 'python' before CCMetagen: `python CCMetagen.py -i $sample_out_kma.res -o results`

Done! This will make an additional quality filter and output a text file with ranked taxonomic classifications and a krona graph file for interactive visualization.

For a list of options to customize your analyze, type:
```
CCMetagen.py -h
```

  * To summarize results for multiple samples, use **CCMetagen_merge**:
```
CCMetagen_merge.py -i $CCMetagen_out
```

Where $CCMetagen_out is the folder containing the CCMetagen taxonomic classifications.
The results must be in .csv format (default or '--mode text' output of CCMetagen), and no other csv file should be present in the folder.

The flag '-t' define the taxonomic level to merge the results. The default is species-level.

Note that CCMetagen_merge merges together all unclassified taxa. The default species-level often contains several taxa that were unclassified at species level, but were classified at higher taxonomic ranks. This higher-level classification is not taken into account: and the resulting merged table will contain one row with all unclassified species.

You can also filter out specific taxa, at any taxonomic level:

Use flag -kr to keep (k) or remove (r) taxa.
Use flag -l to set the taxonomic level for the filtering.
Use flag -tlist to list the taxa to keep or remove (separated by comma).

EX1: Filter out bacteria: `CCMetagen_merge.py -i $CCMetagen_out -kr r -l Kingdom -tlist Bacteria`

EX2: Filter out bacteria and Metazoa: `CCMetagen_merge.py -i $CCMetagen_out -kr r -l Kingdom -tlist Bacteria, Metazoa`

EX3: Merge results at family-level, and remove Metazoa and Viridiplantae taxa at Kingdom level:
```
CCMetagen_merge.py -i $CCMetagen_out -t Family -kr r -l Kingdom -tlist Metazoa,Viridiplantae -o family_table
```

For species-level filtering (where there is a space in taxa names), use quotation marks.
Ex 4: Keep only _Escherichia coli_ and _Candida albicans_:
```
CCMetagen_merge.py -i 05_KMetagen/ -kr k -l Species -tlist "Escherichia coli,Candida albicans"
```

For options, type:
```
CCMetagen_merge.py -h
```

You can also refer to our [tutorial](https://github.com/vrmarcelino/CCMetagen/tree/master/tutorial) for an applied example of the CCMetagen pipeline.


## FAQs

  * Error taxid not found.
You probably need to update your local ETE3 database, which contains the taxids and their lineages information:
```
python
from ete3 import NCBITaxa
ncbi = NCBITaxa()
ncbi.update_taxonomy_database()
quit()
```

  * TypeError: concat() got an unexpected keyword argument 'sort'.
If you get this error, please update the python module pandas:
```
pip install pandas --upgrade --user
```

  * WARNING: no NCBI's taxid found for accession [something],
This match will not get taxonomic ranks

This is not an error, this is just a warning indicating that one of your query sequences matchs to a genbank record for which the NCBI taxonomic identifier (taxid) is not known. CCMetagen therefore will not be able to assign taxonomic ranks to this match, but you will still be able to see it in the output file.

  * The results of the CCMetagen_merge.py at different taxonomic levels do not sum up.
As explained above, this script merges all unclassified taxa at a given taxonomic level. For example, if you have 20 matches to the genus _Candida_, but only 2 matches were classified at the species level, the output of CCMetagen_merge.py -t Species (default) will only have the abundances of two classified _Candida_ species, while the others will be merged with the "Unclassified" taxa. The output of CCMetagen_merge.py -t Genus however will contain all 20 matches. 
If this behaviour is undesirable, one option is to disable the similarity thresholds (use flag -off) - so that all taxonomic levels are reported regardless of their similarity to the reference sequence. Alternatively, you can cluster species at the 'Closest_match' (using the flag --tax_level Closest_match), so that taxa are merged at the 'match' level.


## Complete option list

CCMetagen:
```
usage: CCMetagen.py [-h] [-m MODE] -i RES_FP [-o OUTPUT_FP]
                    [-r REFERENCE_DATABASE] [-c COVERAGE] [-q QUERY_IDENTITY]
                    [-d DEPTH] [-p PVALUE] [-st SPECIES_THRESHOLD]
                    [-gt GENUS_THRESHOLD] [-ft FAMILY_THRESHOLD]
                    [-ot ORDER_THRESHOLD] [-ct CLASS_THRESHOLD]
                    [-pt PHYLUM_THRESHOLD] [-off TURN_OFF_SIM_THRESHOLDS]

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -m MODE, --mode MODE  what do you want CCMetagen to do? Valid options are
                        'visual', 'text' or 'both': text: parses kma, filters
                        based on quality and output a text file with taxonomic
                        information and detailed mapping information visual:
                        parses kma, filters based on quality and output a
                        simplified text file and a krona html file for
                        visualization both: outputs both text and visual file
                        formats. Default = both
  -i RES_FP, --res_fp RES_FP
                        Path to the KMA result (.res file)
  -o OUTPUT_FP, --output_fp OUTPUT_FP
                        Path to the output file. Default = CCMetagen_out
  -r REFERENCE_DATABASE, --reference_database REFERENCE_DATABASE
                        Which reference database was used. Options: UNITE,
                        RefSeq or nt. Default = nt
  -c COVERAGE, --coverage COVERAGE
                        Minimum coverage. Default = 20
  -q QUERY_IDENTITY, --query_identity QUERY_IDENTITY
                        Minimum query identity (Phylum level). Default = 50
  -d DEPTH, --depth DEPTH
                        Minimum sequencing depth. Default = 0.2.
  -p PVALUE, --pvalue PVALUE
                        Minimum p-value. Default = 0.05.
  -st SPECIES_THRESHOLD, --species_threshold SPECIES_THRESHOLD
                        Species-level similarity threshold. Default = 98.41
  -gt GENUS_THRESHOLD, --genus_threshold GENUS_THRESHOLD
                        Genus-level similarity threshold. Default = 96.31
  -ft FAMILY_THRESHOLD, --family_threshold FAMILY_THRESHOLD
                        Family-level similarity threshold. Default = 88.51
  -ot ORDER_THRESHOLD, --order_threshold ORDER_THRESHOLD
                        Order-level similarity threshold. Default = 81.21
  -ct CLASS_THRESHOLD, --class_threshold CLASS_THRESHOLD
                        Class-level similarity threshold. Default = 80.91
  -pt PHYLUM_THRESHOLD, --phylum_threshold PHYLUM_THRESHOLD
                        Phylum-level similarity threshold. Default = 0 - not
                        applied
  -off TURN_OFF_SIM_THRESHOLDS, --turn_off_sim_thresholds TURN_OFF_SIM_THRESHOLDS
                        Turns simularity-based filtering off. Options = y
                        or n. Default = n
 ```

CCMetagen_merge:
 ```
usage: CCMetagen_merge.py [-h] -i INPUT_FP [-t TAX_LEVEL] [-o OUTPUT_FP]
                          [-kr KEEP_OR_REMOVE] [-l FILTERING_TAX_LEVEL]
                          [-tlist TAXA_LIST]

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -i INPUT_FP, --input_fp INPUT_FP
                        Path to the folder containing CCMetagen text results.
                        Note that files must end with ".res.csv" ad the folder
                        should not contain other .res.csv files
  -t TAX_LEVEL, --tax_level TAX_LEVEL
                        Taxonomic level to merge the results. Options:
                        Closest_match (includes different genes for the same
                        species), Species (Default), Genus, Order, Class,
                        Phylum, Kingdom and Superkingdom
  -o OUTPUT_FP, --output_fp OUTPUT_FP
                        Path to the output file. Default = merged_samples
  -kr KEEP_OR_REMOVE, --keep_or_remove KEEP_OR_REMOVE
                        keep or remove taxa. Options = k (keep), r (remove)
                        and n (none, default)
  -l FILTERING_TAX_LEVEL, --filtering_tax_level FILTERING_TAX_LEVEL
                        level to perform taxonomic filtering, default = none
  -tlist TAXA_LIST, --taxa_list TAXA_LIST
                        list taxon names (comma-separated) that you want to
                        keep or exclude
 ```
